Alerting section audit - Part 2 (#5448)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/monitors/monitor_types/outlier.md

  text: "Consult your monitor status"
---

## Overview

> Outlier Detection is an algorithmic feature that allows you to detect when some members of a group are behaving different compared to the others. For example, you could detect that one web server in a pool is processing an unusual number of requests, or significantly more 500 errors are happening in one AWS availability zone than the others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Outlier Detection is an algorithmic feature that allows you to detect when some tag values associated with a tag key are behaving different compared to the others. For example, you could detect that one web server in a pool is processing an unusual number of requests, or significantly more 500 errors are happening in one AWS availability zone than the others.
```

Author: This terminology makes sense to us but using it in the overview section could cause confusion.

Reviewer: 🤔 it's a tricky spot, should we describe technically what is happening ? or should we use concepts to describe the behaviour?

Reviewer 2: If it's helpful, I've used the language "when a group is behaving differently than its peers".

{{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/outliers/outliers-metric-alert.png" alt="outliers metric alert" responsive="true" style="width:80%;">}}

## Monitor creation

To create an [outlier monitor][1] in Datadog, use the main navigation: *Monitors --> New Monitor --> Outlier*.

The outlier monitor uses the `outliers` function from the Datadog query language. When you apply this function to a series, it returns the usual results with an outlier series marked.

### Define the metric

Any metric currently reporting to Datadog is available for monitors. For more information, see the [Metric Monitor][2] page.

> The outlier monitor requires a metric with a group (hosts, availability zones, partitions, etc.) that has three or more members, which exhibit uniform behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The outlier monitor requires a metric with a group by a tag key (`hosts`, `availability-zones`, `partitions`, etc..) that has three or more tags value associated to it, which exhibit uniform behavior.
```

Author: I think this makes the sentence to confusing.

### Set alert conditions

> * Trigger a separate alert for each outlier `<GROUP>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Trigger a separate alert for each outlier `<TAG_VALUE>`
```

Author: I'm ok with changing this to `<TAG_KEY>` but `<TAG_VALUE>` is incorrect.

Reviewer: It might be better to just say `<TAG>` there no that i'm re-reading this.

Author: I'm going to leave this as group since it says `(select group)` in the UI.

> * during the last `5 minutes`, `15 minutes`, `1 hour`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* During the last `5 minutes`, `15 minutes`, `1 hour`, etc.
```

Author: during is lower case to match the UI

Reviewer: oh 👌

* Using algorithm `MAD`, `DBSCAN`, `scaledMAD`, or `scaledDBSCAN`

> * tolerance: `0.33`, `1.0`, `3.0`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Tolerance: `0.33`, `1.0`, `3.0`, etc.
```

Author: same - to match the ui

Reviewer: ok 👌

* %: `10`, `20`, `30`, etc. (only for `MAD` algorithms)

When setting up an outlier monitor, the time window is an important consideration. If the time window is too large, you might not be alerted in time. If the time window is too short, the alerts are not as resilient to one-off spikes.

To ensure your alert is properly calibrated, set the time window in the preview graph and use the reverse (<<) button to look back in time at outliers that would have triggered an alert. Additionally, you can use this feature to tune your parameters to a specific outlier algorithm.

{{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/outliers/outliers-new-monitor-graph-calibrate.png" alt="outliers new monitor graph calibrate" responsive="true" style="width:80%;">}}

#### Algorithms

Datadog offers two types of outlier detection algorithms: `DBSCAN`/`scaledDBSCAN` and `MAD`/`scaledMAD`. It is recommended to use the default algorithm, DBSCAN. If you have trouble detecting the correct outliers, adjust the parameters of DBSCAN or try the MAD algorithm. The scaled algorithms may be useful if your metrics are large scale and closely clustered.

> ##### DBSCAN

Reviewer: Should we use tabs here as well ?

> [DBSCAN][3] (density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise) is a popular clustering algorithm. Traditionally, DBSCAN takes: 1) a parameter 𝜀 that specifies a distance threshold under which two points are considered to be close; and 2) the minimum number of points that have to be within a point's 𝜀-radius before that point can start agglomerating. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[DBSCAN][3] (density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise) is a popular clustering algorithm. Traditionally, DBSCAN takes: 

1. A parameter `𝜀` that specifies a distance threshold under which two points are considered to be close.
2. The minimum number of points that have to be within a point's `𝜀-radius` before that point can start agglomerating. 
```

> Datadog uses a simplified form of DBSCAN to detect outliers on timeseries. Each host is considered to be a point in *d*-dimensions, where *d* is the number of elements in the timeseries. Any point can agglomerate, and any point not in the largest cluster is considered an outlier. The initial distance threshold is set by creating a new median timeseries by taking the median of the values from the existing timeseries at every time point. The Euclidean distance between each host and the median series is calculated. The threshold is set as the median of these distances, multiplied by a normalizing constant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog uses a simplified form of DBSCAN to detect outliers on timeseries. Each tag value is considered to be a point in *d*-dimensions, where *d* is the number of elements in the timeseries. Any point can agglomerate, and any point not in the largest cluster is considered an outlier. The initial distance threshold is set by creating a new median timeserie by taking the median of the values from the existing timeseries at every time point. The Euclidean distance between each tag value and the median series is calculated. The threshold is set as the median of these distances, multiplied by a normalizing constant.
```

Author: Looks like you replaced `host` with `tag value`. Did you mean `tag key`? We would need to verify this with monitors.

Reviewer: It might be just `tag` now that i'm re-reading it.

Author: @unclebconnor - Do you have any feedback here or should we ask data science?

Reviewer 2: I think this is appropriate.  Folks who are curious about how the algorithms work will probably be able to grok this, even though it feels a bit more technical than most of our other doc language.

I might clarify the `host` vs `tag` vs `group` with data science.  My impression is that this also refers to a `host` `group` (or maybe `tag group`), rather than generally hosts so it might be better to generalize there.

**Parameters**<br>

> This implementation of DBSCAN takes one parameter, `tolerance`, the constant by which the initial threshold is multiplied to yield DBSCAN's distance parameter 𝜀. Set the tolerance parameter according to how similarly you expect your hosts to behave—larger values allow for more tolerance in how much a host can deviate from its peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This implementation of DBSCAN takes one parameter, `tolerance`, the constant by which the initial threshold is multiplied to yield DBSCAN's distance parameter `𝜀`. Set the tolerance parameter according to how similarly you expect your tag values to behave—larger values of `𝜀` allow for more tolerance in how much a tag value can deviate from its peers.
```

Author: Would need to be verified by monitors

Reviewer: Same here it would need to be `tag`.

Author: @unclebconnor - Do you have any feedback here or should we ask data science?

Reviewer 2: DS might have something to add but this seems very clear to me.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above...I think `groups` or `tag groups` would be the way to go based on the language we use internally, assuming that's consistent with our external doc practices

##### DBSCAN vs. MAD

So which algorithm should you use? For most outliers, any algorithm performs well at the default settings. However, there are subtle cases where one algorithm is more appropriate.

In the following image, a group of hosts is flushing their buffers together, while one host is flushing its buffer slightly later. DBSCAN picks this up as an outlier whereas MAD does not. This is a case where you might prefer to use MAD since the synchronization of the group is just an artifact of the hosts being restarted at the same time. On the other hand, if instead of flushed buffers, the metrics represented a scheduled job that should be synchronized across hosts, DBSCAN would be the correct choice.

{{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/outliers/outliers-flushing.png" alt="outliers flushing" responsive="true" style="width:80%;">}}

### Notifications

For detailed instructions on the **Say what's happening** and **Notify your team** sections, see the [Notifications][5] page.

## Troubleshooting

> The outlier algorithms are set up to identify outliers that differ from the majority of metrics that are behaving similarly. If your hosts exhibit "banding" behavior as shown below (maybe each band represents a different shard), we recommend tagging each band with an identifier, and setting up outlier detection alerts on each band separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The outlier algorithms are set up to identify outliers that differ from the majority of metrics that are behaving similarly. If your tag value exhibit "banding" behavior as shown below (maybe each band represents a different shard), Datadog recommends tagging each band with an identifier, and setting up outlier detection to alert on each band separately.
```

Author: Would need to be verified by monitors

Author: @unclebconnor - Do you have any feedback here or should we ask data science?

Reviewer 2: Hmmm thought I commented on this but must not have clicked save:

`set up to identify outliers that differ from the majority of metrics that are behaving similarly`

could be 
`set up to identify groups that are behaving differently than their peers`
